\input texinfo
@settitle ny - Nytrix Compiler and Interpreter
@setfilename ny.info

@copying
ny - Nytrix language compiler and interpreter tool.
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Nytrix Developers.
MIT License
@end copying

@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* ny: (ny).                    Nytrix compiler and interpreter tool.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title ny Manual
@author Nytrix Developers
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top ny - Nytrix Compiler and Interpreter

The @command{ny} command is the primary tool for Nytrix. It supports JIT execution, AOT compilation, and an interactive REPL.

@menu
* Subcommands::        Subcommand reference (new, pkg, fmt, doc, test, perf, make).
* Options::            Command line arguments.
* Environment::        Supported environment variables.
* Examples::           Common usage patterns.
* See Also::           Related documentation.
@end menu

@node Subcommands
@chapter Subcommands

The @command{ny} binary dispatches to several built-in tools via subcommands.

@table @code
@item ny new [@var{dir}] [@var{options}]
Create a fresh project scaffold. Generates @file{ny.pkg.json},
@file{src/main.ny}, README, and @file{.gitignore}. Options:
@code{--name}, @code{--author}, @code{--version}, @code{--description},
@code{--license}, @code{--repository}, @code{--force}.

@item ny pkg @var{command} [@var{args}]
Package manager subcommand. See below for commands.

@item ny fmt [@var{paths}...] [@var{options}]
Format Nytrix source files and audit for optimization candidates.
Options include @code{--check}, @code{--specialize}, @code{--metaprog},
@code{--trim}, and @code{--json}.

@item ny doc [@var{args}]
Search and generate documentation. @code{ny doc search <topic>}
looks up docs, module names, symbols, docstrings, and keyword tags.
@code{ny doc get <query>} prints the closest reference entry.
@code{ny doc -o docs} generates the full HTML reference.

@item ny test [@var{paths}...] [@var{options}]
Run test suites (runtime, error, and pattern-selected tests).

@item ny perf [@var{args}]
Run benchmark gates, profiling, and comparison workflows.

@item ny make [@var{target}]
Native build wrapper. Targets: @code{bin}, @code{test}, @code{std},
@code{docs}, @code{perf}, @code{install}.
@end table

@menu
* ny pkg::              Package manager details.
@end menu

@node ny pkg
@section ny pkg

@table @code
@item ny pkg init [@var{name}]
Create a @file{ny.pkg.json} manifest.

@item ny pkg add @var{name} @var{source}
Add, fetch, and lock a package dependency. Source forms:
local dir/file path, @code{git+} URL, @code{git@@} SSH,
@code{.git} suffix, archive (@code{.tar}, @code{.tar.gz}, @code{.tgz},
@code{.tar.xz}, @code{.txz}, @code{.tar.bz2}, @code{.tbz}, @code{.zip}),
or @code{archive+} prefix. URL downloads use @code{curl} or @code{wget}.

@item ny pkg get @var{name} [@var{source}]
Alias for add; source may come from registry lookup.

@item ny pkg install [@var{name} [@var{source}]]
Install manifest dependencies or a single dep.

@item ny pkg sync
Reinstall all manifest dependencies.

@item ny pkg uninstall @var{name}
Remove local install and manifest entry.

@item ny pkg update [@var{name}]
Refresh git packages and lockfile.

@item ny pkg list
List manifest dependencies.

@item ny pkg search [@var{query}]
Fuzzy-search direct registry entries and registered package repositories. Use
@code{--interactive} for the built-in picker.

@item ny pkg info [@var{name}]
Print package metadata and deps.

@item ny pkg path [@var{name}]
Print install root or specific package path.

@item ny pkg venv
Create or print @file{.nytrix/venv/lib} path.

@item ny pkg registry [@var{name}]
Show registry source files or look up a package.
@end table

Install scopes:

@table @code
@item --inplace (default)
Install into @file{./ny_modules}.
@item --vendor
Install into @file{./vendor/ny_modules} for repository vendoring.
@item --venv
Install into @file{./.nytrix/venv/lib}.
@item --user, --global
Install into @code{$NYTRIX_PKG_HOME} or @file{~/.nytrix/pkg}.
@item --system, --syswide
Install into @code{$NYTRIX_SYSTEM_PKG_HOME} or
@file{/usr/local/share/nytrix/pkg}.
@item --root @var{DIR}
Custom install root override.
@end table

Lockfile is written as @file{ny.pkg.json.lock} with per-package source,
ref, path, and git commit. Recursive dependency install walks child
package manifests up to depth 16.

Manifest metadata fields are @code{name}, @code{version}, @code{description},
@code{author}, @code{license}, @code{repository}, and direct
@code{dependencies}. @command{ny new} and @command{ny pkg init} accept matching
metadata options.

@node Options
@chapter Options

@section General
@table @code
@item --color=@var{WHEN}
Set color output: @code{auto}, @code{always}, or @code{never}.
@item -safe-mode, --safe-mode, --safe
Enable the full safety profile: strict types, ownership/borrow checks, RC/RAII
cleanup, strict effect/alias policy, and safe raw-memory diagnostics.
@item --mode=@var{MODE}
Select a runtime memory preset: @code{safe}, @code{fast}, or @code{bare}.
@item --strict-types
Reject dynamic type cliffs at compile time.
@item --no-strict-types
Allow dynamic type cliffs even under safe mode.
@item --strict
Enable strict types plus ownership/borrow diagnostics.
@item --ownership
Enable ownership tracking through the RAII heap policy.
@item --ownership-strict
Enable strict ownership diagnostics.
@item --borrow-check
Alias for @code{--ownership-strict}.
@item --max-errors=@var{N}
Stop parsing after @var{N} errors. Use @code{0} to disable the cap.
@item --effect-require-known
Require known effects for user functions (default on).
@item --no-effect-require-known
Allow unknown effects.
@item --alias-require-known
Require known alias/escape facts (default on).
@item --no-alias-require-known
Allow unknown alias/escape facts.
@item --alias-require-no-escape
Require no argument escape / return alias.
@end table

Declared @code{@@pure} and @code{@@effects(...)} contracts are always checked
for the annotated function. The effect policy options tighten unannotated code
and unknown summaries.
@code{@@async_effects} reuses the inferred @code{io} effect as a lowering hint:
after the source effect contract passes, eligible functions lower through the
stackless async path. @code{NYTRIX_EFFECT_ASYNC_LOWERING=1} turns on the same
lowering for eligible user functions globally.

Typed contracts are non-null by default: @code{nil} is accepted only for
nullable types (for example @code{?int}) and pointer-like types (for example
@code{*int}). Native OS/Vulkan/FFI handles use @code{handle}; use
@code{?handle} when a missing handle is valid.

@section Optimization
@table @code
@item -O0, -O1, -O2, -O3, -O
Set optimization level. Native emission defaults to @code{-O2}; JIT and REPL
runs default to @code{-O0} for edit latency. @code{-O} aliases @code{-O2}.
@item --profile=@var{MODE}
Select an optimization profile: @code{speed}, @code{balanced},
@code{compile}, @code{size}, @code{none}, or @code{peak}. The profile is
propagated into LLVM, runtime compilation, JIT/AOT cache keys, and codegen
fast paths. @code{peak} turns on heavier typed-loop and arithmetic lowering
for peak native benchmark runs.
@item --fast
Convenience mode: keeps optimization high, disables verify, and emits stripped
output by default.
@item -passes=@var{PIPE}
Custom LLVM pass pipeline (for example @code{default<O2>}).
@item --opt-dce, --dce, --no-opt-dce, --no-dce
Enable/disable dead-code elimination override.
@item --opt-internalize, --no-opt-internalize
Enable/disable symbol internalization override.
@item --opt-loops, --no-opt-loops
Enable/disable loop optimization override.
@item --opt-autotune, --no-opt-autotune
Enable/disable adaptive optimization-level tuning override.
@end table

The expression form @code{llvm("ctpop.i64", x)} directly splices LLVM
intrinsics for scalar/native ABI values. The @code{llvm.} prefix is optional;
use the fully typed LLVM intrinsic spelling for overloaded intrinsics.

@section Parallelism
@table @code
@item --gpu=@var{MODE}, --gpu @var{MODE}
GPU mode: @code{off}, @code{auto}, @code{opencl}.
@item --gpu-backend=@var{B}, --gpu-backend @var{B}
Backend: @code{none}, @code{auto}, @code{opencl}, @code{cuda}, @code{hip}, @code{metal}.
@item --gpu-offload=@var{M}, --gpu-offload @var{M}
Offload policy: @code{off}, @code{auto}, @code{on}, @code{force}.
@item --gpu-min-work=@var{N}, --gpu-min-work @var{N}
Minimum work-items before GPU offload.
@item --gpu-async, --no-gpu-async
Enable or disable async GPU dispatch.
@item --gpu-fast-math, --no-gpu-fast-math
Enable/disable relaxed GPU math.
@item --accel-target=@var{T}, --accel-target @var{T}
Accelerator target: @code{auto}, @code{none}, @code{nvptx}, @code{amdgpu}, @code{spirv}, @code{hsaco}.
@item --accel-object=@var{K}, --accel-object @var{K}
Device artifact kind: @code{auto}, @code{none}, @code{ptx}, @code{o}, @code{spv}, @code{hsaco}.
@item --gpu-target=@var{T}, --gpu-target @var{T}
Compatibility alias; maps target to backend/accelerator.
@item --parallel=@var{MODE}, --parallel @var{MODE}
Parallel mode: @code{off}, @code{auto}, @code{threads}, @code{modules}.
@item --threads=@var{N}, --threads @var{N}
Thread budget for parallel work.
@item --parallel-min-work=@var{N}, --parallel-min-work @var{N}
Minimum work-items before threaded parallel execution.
@end table

The standard library exposes @code{std.os.parallel.scheduler_status} and
@code{work_stealing_plan} for @code{@@thread} runner policy, including the
@code{NYTRIX_THREAD_SCHEDULER=auto|direct|work-stealing} environment override.

@section Cache
@table @code
@item --clean-cache
Remove Nytrix JIT, std bitcode/source, tiny-AOT, and AOT run-cache artifacts.
@end table

@section Build Tuning
@table @code
@item --host-triple=@var{TRIPLE}, --host-triple @var{TRIPLE}
Host target triple for native build.
@item --arm-float-abi=@var{ABI}, --arm-float-abi @var{ABI}
ARM float ABI: @code{soft}, @code{softfp}, or @code{hard}.
@item --host-cflags=@var{FLAGS}, --host-cflags @var{FLAGS}
Extra host compiler flags.
@item --host-ldflags=@var{FLAGS}, --host-ldflags @var{FLAGS}
Extra host linker flags.
@item --gprof, --no-gprof, -pg, --profile
Enable/disable @code{-pg} in native build path.
@item --std-builtin-ops, --no-std-builtin-ops
Enable or disable std builtin-op lowering.
@item --debug-locals, --no-debug-locals
Enable/disable local/global debug records.
@item --dwarf-version=@var{N}
DWARF version for @code{-g} builds (2..5).
@item --dwarf-split-inlining, --no-dwarf-split-inlining
Enable/disable split-inline callsite debug info.
@item --dwarf-profile-info, --no-dwarf-profile-info
Enable/disable profiling-friendly location info.
@end table

@section Execution
@table @code
@item -run
Build a temporary native executable and run it.
@item --jit, --run=jit
Run through MCJIT. This is the default for @command{ny file.ny} and
@command{ny -c '...'}.
@item --run=auto, --run=aot
Alias the AOT run path used by @code{-run}.
@item -emit-only
Only emit output, do not execute.
@item -o [@var{PATH}], --output [@var{PATH}], --output=@var{PATH}
Emit native binary at @var{PATH}; implies @code{-emit-only}. If omitted, uses default output name.
@item -strip, --strip, -no-strip, --no-strip
Create stripped or unstripped binary (default unstripped).
@item -c @var{CODE}, -e @var{CODE}, --eval @var{CODE}
Execute inline Nytrix code.
@item --
Stop option parsing; remaining arguments are passed as script/runtime arguments.
@end table

@section Stdlib
@table @code
@item -std @var{MODE}
Stdlib inclusion mode: @code{none}, @code{minimal}, @code{full} (default @code{minimal}).
@item -no-std
Disable stdlib loading.
@item --std-path=@var{PATH}
Use custom @file{std.ny}.
@item --full-mod
Alias for @code{-std full}.
@end table

@section Linking
@table @code
@item -L@var{DIR}, -L @var{DIR}
Add linker search path (repeatable).
@item -l@var{LIB}, -l @var{LIB}
Link against library (repeatable).
@end table

@section REPL
@table @code
@item -i, -interactive
Interactive REPL.
@item -repl
Read source from stdin (one-shot).
@item --plain-repl
Force plain REPL mode without line-editing UI.
@end table

Inside the REPL, @code{:snapshot [snapfile] [-o executable]} writes the current
persistent session as a source-backed image and can immediately AOT-export it.
@code{:load snapfile} restores snapshot images while ordinary file loading keeps
its existing source-load behavior.

@section Debugging
@table @code
@item -v, -vv, -vvv, -verbose, --verbose, --verbose=@var{N}
Control verbosity level.
@item --debug
Enable verbose + debug logs.
@item -time
Show timing for each phase.
@item -dump-ast
Dump parsed AST.
@item -dump-llvm
Print LLVM IR to stdout.
@item -dump-tokens
Dump lexer tokens.
@item -dump-docs
Extract and print function docstrings.
@item -dump-funcs
List all compiled functions.
@item -dump-symbols
Show runtime symbol table.
@item -dump-stats
Print compilation statistics.
@item -verify
Verify LLVM module.
@item -g
Emit debug symbols.
@item --emit-ir=@var{PATH}
Emit LLVM IR to file.
@item --ir-full, --ir-no-std
Include or omit std/lib definitions in emitted IR.
@item --emit-asm=@var{PATH}
Emit assembly to file.
@item --dump-on-error
Write @file{build/debug/last_source.ny} and @file{build/debug/last_ir.ll} on errors.
@item -trace
Enable execution tracing.
@end table

@section Info
@table @code
@item -h, -help, --help
Show help message.
@item --help env
Show supported environment variables.
@item --help-env, --env-help
Alias forms for environment help.
@item -version, --version
Show version information.
@end table

@node Environment
@chapter Environment Variables

Policy env overrides are disabled by default. Use CLI flags for
GPU/parallel/effect/debug behavior. Common environment variables include:

@table @code
@item NYTRIX_STD_PATH
Override @code{std.ny} lookup path.
@item NYTRIX_STD_PREBUILT
Use prebuilt stdlib source.
@item NYTRIX_BUILD_STD_PATH
Override generated @file{std.ny} path.
@item NYTRIX_HOST_TRIPLE, NYTRIX_ARM_FLOAT_ABI
Host-target build tuning.
@item NYTRIX_HOST_CFLAGS, NYTRIX_HOST_LDFLAGS
Host compiler/linker tuning.
@item NYTRIX_TRACE_COMPTIME_MACRO
Trace native compile-time macro expansion.
@end table

@node Examples
@chapter Examples
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{ny new myapp}
Create a new project scaffold.
@item @code{ny myapp/src/main.ny}
JIT compile and run.
@item @code{ny -run myapp/src/main.ny}
AOT compile and run native executable.
@item @code{ny fmt --check lib}
Check formatting of lib directory.
@item @code{ny pkg add foo ../foo}
Add local directory as dependency.
@item @code{ny pkg add bar git+https://example.com/bar.git#main}
Add git dependency with ref.
@item @code{ny etc/tests/bench/sieve.ny}
Compile and run through the default JIT path.
@item @code{ny -O2 -run etc/tests/bench/sieve.ny}
Build an optimized native executable and run it.
@item @code{ny --gpu-backend=cuda --gpu-offload=force --threads=8 etc/tests/bench/vector.ny}
Run with explicit accelerator/thread policy.
@item @code{ny --host-cflags='-march=native' --dwarf-version=5 -g -o app etc/tests/rt/control.ny}
AOT build with explicit host/debug tuning.
@item @code{ny -c 'print("hello")'}
Execute inline code.
@item @code{ny -i}
Start REPL.
@end itemize

@node See Also
@chapter See Also
See the @code{nytrix} manual for the language/runtime overview.

Start a new project with @command{ny new mydir}.

Use @command{ny fmt --specialize} to audit Nytrix source for branches and
@code{case} dispatch that can move to @code{comptime}. Use
@command{ny fmt --metaprog} to audit function families, typed boundaries,
resource blocks, derives, diagnostics, and generated backend/table surfaces.
@command{ny fmt --trim} includes both.

Canonical markdown docs in the repository:

@itemize @bullet
@item @file{docs/spec/language.md} for the language and runtime surface.
@item @file{docs/spec/syntax.md} for syntax forms and source spellings.
@item @file{docs/learn/tooling.md} for command families and diagnostics.
@item @file{docs/learn/library.md} for the standard-library domain map.
@item @file{docs/learn/packages.md} for package manifests, roots, sources, and publishing shape.
@item @file{docs/README.md} for top-level build/doc pointers.
@end itemize

@bye
