\input texinfo
@settitle Nytrix Manual
@setfilename nytrix.info

@copying
Nytrix - systems programming language.
Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Nytrix Developers.
MIT License
@end copying

@dircategory Programming
@direntry
* Nytrix: (nytrix).           Systems programming language.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Nytrix Manual
@author Nytrix Developers
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top nytrix - systems programming language

Nytrix is a systems language with a C core and a self-hosting standard
library.

@menu
* Introduction::        Overview and execution model.
* Language Reference::  Syntax, values, declarations, and control flow.
* Syntax Grammar::      EBNF-style surface grammar.
* Modules and Imports:: Organizing code with explicit @code{use}.
* Extensible Syntax::   Registry-based macros, attributes, and rewrites.
* Builtins::            Compile-time and low-level builtins.
* Runtime::             Tagged-value runtime model.
* Indices::             Index of commands and concepts.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Nytrix keeps most library features in @file{lib/}. There is no implicit
prelude; symbols are brought into scope explicitly via @code{use}.

Execution modes are provided by @command{ny}:

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{ny file.ny}: run one Nytrix file.
@item @code{ny -c '...'}: run inline Nytrix code.
@item @code{ny --plain-repl}: plain REPL path useful for incremental-eval debugging.
@item @code{:snapshot app.nys -o app}: REPL command that saves an image-backed
session and exports it through the normal AOT path.
@end itemize

File mode is the reproducible behavioral record. REPL mode can diverge because
it evaluates through separate JIT submissions. Snapshot images provide a
replayable bridge from interactive exploration back to file/AOT mode.

@node Language Reference
@chapter Language Reference

@section Lexical Structure
@table @asis
@item Identifiers
@code{[A-Za-z_][A-Za-z0-9_]*}
@item Comments
Single-line comments start with @code{;}. A common style is @code{;;}.
@item Strings
Single, double, and triple-quoted strings are supported. f-strings are also supported.
@end table

@section Values and Literals
@itemize @bullet
@item @strong{Integers}: decimal, hex (@code{0x}), octal (@code{0o}), binary (@code{0b}).
@item @strong{Numeric suffixes}: @code{i8/i16/i32/i64}, @code{u8/u16/u32/u64}, @code{f32/f64/f128}.
@item @strong{Native handles}: @code{handle} is an opaque native-width scalar for OS, Vulkan, and FFI handles.
@item @strong{Booleans}: @code{true}, @code{false}.
@item @strong{Nil}: @code{nil}.
@item @strong{Containers}: list literals @code{[1, 2, 3]} and dict literals @code{@{"k": v@}}.
@item @strong{Sets/Tuples}: provided by std constructors (for example @code{set(...)} and @code{tuple([...])}).
@end itemize

@section Declarations and Types

@table @code
@item def
Immutable binding.
@item mut
Mutable binding.
@item del
Clears a binding.
@end table

Optional type annotations are supported on variables, parameters, and returns.
Nullable types use @code{?T}; pointer types use @code{*T}.
Native handles use @code{handle}. They are passed as integer ABI values, not as
addressable memory; use @code{ptr} or @code{*T} for raw pointers and
out-parameters.
Capability annotations such as @code{sequence}, @code{numeric},
@code{indexable}, @code{iterable}, and @code{allocator} are checked by the
static conformance pipeline and do not create runtime wrapper objects.

@example
def int: x = 1
mut ?int: y = nil
def handle: image = load64_h(slot)

fn add(int: a, int: b): int @{
   return a + b
@}
@end example

@section Functions

@example
fn adder(x)@{
   lambda(y)@{ x + y @}
@}

fn log(...args)@{
   return args
@}
@end example

External declarations support symbol aliases:

@example
extern fn c_getpid(): i32 as "getpid"
@end example

Native ABI annotations include scalar types and layout names. A layout
parameter is passed by value from Ny pointer storage; a layout return is copied
into Ny-owned layout storage.

@section Control Flow
@table @asis
@item Conditionals
@code{if} / @code{elif} / @code{else}. Paren and no-paren condition forms are used in tests.
@item Loops
@code{while} and @code{for x in iter}.
@item Pattern matching
@code{match} supports guarded arms. @code{case} uses @code{->} arms,
comma-separated patterns, wildcard @code{_}, and inclusive @code{a..b} ranges
for fast multi-label dispatch.
@item Errors
@code{try @{ ... @} catch err @{ ... @}}.
@item Scope exit
@code{defer @{ ... @}}.
@item Resource blocks
@code{with Type: name = value @{ ... @}} binds a scoped value and runs the
body. Use explicit @code{defer} cleanup around APIs that require close, free,
destroy, or release calls.
@end table

Compile-time blocks use @code{comptime @{ ... @}}. @code{if(comptime@{ ... @})}
is folded while compiling, and @code{case comptime@{ return value @} @{ ... @}}
with literal or range arms emits only the selected guardless arm.
Compile-time tables use @code{comptime table Name @{ pattern -> value @}} and
are called with @code{comptime match Name(key, fallback)}. They reuse
@code{case} patterns, including wildcard @code{_}, comma patterns, guards, and
inclusive @code{a..b} ranges, without runtime dictionary setup.
Compile-time reflection uses @code{comptime fields(Type) as f @{ emit ... @}}
and @code{comptime exports(module.path) as name @{ emit ... @}} to expand
field/export templates without runtime metadata.
Compile-time function families use @code{comptime template make(v) @{ ... @}}
plus @code{comptime emit make(arg)} or
@code{for v in comptime ["x", "y"] @{ emit make(v) @}}. Template values can be
used as expressions, bare symbols can fill generated function/type names, and
generated identifiers can splice values inside names with @code{$@{v@}},
while whole generated names use the plain template parameter, like
@code{fn name(...): T}.
Compile-time diagnostic rules use @code{comptime diagnostic rule Name @{ ... @}}
to attach deterministic compiler checks and fixes to an abstraction without
emitting runtime objects. The supported call predicate form is
@code{when call.name == "fn" && !is_literal(call.arg(n))}; @code{call.arg(n)}
is zero-based.
Generated modules use @code{module pkg.name generated from Spec @{ ... @}}.
Assignments in the block become compile-time properties, @code{emit} expands
templates into a normal module, and ordinary declarations are explicit
handwritten escape hatches.

Layout records and shapes use the existing @code{layout} surface:
@code{layout record Material derive(default, eq, hash, debug_str) @{ ... @}}
emits ordinary constructor/equality/hash/debug helpers, and
@code{layout shape Info derive(load, store, zero) @{ ... @}} emits default,
boundary-unpack, load, store, and zero helpers. Shape boundaries use
@code{layout guard Info: info = value else @{ ... @}} so repeated
@code{is_dict}/@code{get}/default code is kept at the module input edge.

@section Operators
@itemize @bullet
@item Arithmetic: @code{+ - * / %}
@item Comparison: @code{== != < <= > >=}
@item Logical: @code{&& || !}
@item Bitwise/integer: @code{& | ^^ << >> ~}
@item Ternary: @code{cond ? a : b}
@end itemize

@code{?} is used for nullable types and ternary expressions; it is not an error-propagation operator.

@node Syntax Grammar
@chapter Syntax Grammar

Nytrix also has a dedicated syntax-format reference in
@file{docs/spec/syntax.md}. The following mirrors the current compiler surface
shape documented by the spec pages.

@example
program      = @{ top-item @}
top-item     = stmt | fn-def | extern-fn-def | module-def | use-decl | enum-def | include

binding-stmt = ("def" | "mut") bind-list [ "=" expr ]
fn-def       = @{ attr @} "fn" ident "(" [ param-list ] ")" [ ":" type-expr ] block
if-stmt      = "if" expr block @{ "elif" expr block @} [ "else" block ]
if-expr      = "if" expr value-block "else" value-block
while-stmt   = "while" expr block
match-stmt   = "match" expr "@{" @{ match-arm @} "@}"
case-stmt    = "case" expr "@{" @{ case-arm @} "@}"
enum-def     = "enum" ident [ "<" type-param-list ">" ] "@{" @{ variant @} "@}"
include      = "#include" (string | "<" header ">") "as" string

expr         = ternary-expr
ternary-expr = coalesce-expr [ "?" expr ":" expr ]
coalesce-expr= pipe-expr @{ "??" pipe-expr @}
pipe-expr    = logic-or-expr @{ "|>" logic-or-expr @}
@end example

@node Modules and Imports
@chapter Modules and Imports

Module declarations commonly use explicit export lists or star export:

@example
module pkg.name (sym1, sym2)
module local *
module pkg.name @{ export core(sym1) export debug(dump) internal(_helper) @}
@end example

Import forms used across std and runtime tests:

@example
use std.core
use std.core *
use std.core:debug *
use std.core.str as str
use std.core (len, append as push)
use "./local.ny" (helper_add as my_add)
@end example

Default star imports see @code{core}. A profiled star import such as
@code{use pkg.name:debug *} imports core plus that profile, while
@code{internal(...)} keeps private helpers out of the public surface.
When a braced module block contains only @code{export} / @code{internal}
directives, it is a module surface header and following file-level definitions
still belong to that module.

@node Extensible Syntax
@chapter Extensible Syntax

Nytrix exposes syntax extension through @code{std.core.syntax}.
The API is registry-based and deterministic.

@example
use std.core.syntax as syntax

mut reg = syntax.new_registry()
reg = syntax.register_macro_in(reg, "double", handler)
reg = syntax.register_attribute_in(reg, "mark", attr_handler)
@end example

Core surface includes:

@itemize @bullet
@item Registries: @code{new_registry}, @code{registry}, @code{reset_registry}
@item Macros: @code{register_macro}, @code{expand_macro}, @code{expand_form}, @code{expand_form_deep}
@item Attributes: @code{register_attribute}, @code{apply_attribute}
@item Rewrites: @code{new_rewriter}, @code{register_rewrite}, @code{rewrite_fixpoint}
@end itemize

Behavior uses deterministic order, explicit state, and defined fallbacks:
missing macro handlers yield @code{nil}; missing attribute handlers return the
input node.

@node Builtins
@chapter Builtins

@table @code
@item comptime
@code{comptime @{ ... @}} executes at compile time.
@item static_assert
@code{static_assert(cond, "message")} fails compilation when @code{cond} is
compile-time false. Use @code{static_assert(comptime @{ return cond @}, "msg")}
for computed checks.
@item assert_compile
Alias for @code{static_assert}. @code{assert_compile_range(value, lo, hi, "msg")}
and @code{assert_compile_index(container, index, "msg")} fail compilation unless
the compiler's integer range and container length proofs prove the contract.
@code{range_proven(value, lo, hi)} and @code{index_proven(container, index)}
return compile-time booleans for the same proof engine.
@item embed
@code{embed("path")} embeds file content.
@item asm
@code{asm("template", "constraints", args...)} provides inline assembly.
@item Attributes
Built-in function attributes include @code{@@extern}, @code{@@naked},
@code{@@jit}, @code{@@thread}, @code{@@consteval}, @code{@@pure},
@code{@@effects(...)}, @code{@@async_effects}, @code{@@constant_time},
@code{@@returns_owned}, @code{@@returns_borrow(x)}, ownership contract
attributes such as @code{@@borrows(x)} and @code{@@consumes(x)}, and
@code{@@llvm(...)}.
@code{@@pure} is equivalent to @code{@@effects(none)}. Declared effect
contracts are compile-time checks: inferred @code{io}, @code{alloc},
@code{ffi}, or @code{thread} effects outside the declared mask are errors.
@code{@@async_effects} lowers eligible @code{io}-effect functions through the
stackless async path after those contracts pass.
The expression form @code{llvm("ctpop.i64", x)} directly splices an LLVM
intrinsic call through LLVM's intrinsic registry for scalar/native ABI values;
the @code{llvm.} prefix is optional.
@end table

@node Runtime
@chapter Runtime

Nytrix uses 64-bit tagged values (LSB=1 for integers, LSB=0 for pointers).
Manual allocation primitives include @code{__malloc}, @code{__free}, and @code{__realloc}.
System/FFI interop is provided through std modules and the runtime C layer.

@node Indices
@chapter Indices
@appendix Index
@printindex cp

@bye
